HHS Public Access

Author manuscript

Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 November 03.

Published in final edited form as:

Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2020 January 01; 24(1): 48-64. doi:10.5588/ijtld.19.0025.

# A systematic review and meta-analysis of first-line tuberculosis drug concentrations and treatment outcomes

R. Perumal $^{1,2,3}$ , K. Naidoo $^{1,3}$ , A. Naidoo $^{1}$ , G. Ramachandran $^{4}$ , A. Requena-Mendez $^{5}$ , C. Sekaggya-Wiltshire $^{6}$ , S. G. Mpagama $^{7}$ , A. Matteelli $^{8}$ , J. Fehr $^{9}$ , S. K. Heysell $^{10}$ , N. Padayatchi $^{1,3}$

$^{1}$ Centre for the AIDS Programme of Research in South Africa, Nelson R Mandela School of Medicine, College of Health Sciences
$^{2}$ Medical Research Council-CAPRISA HIV-TB Pathogenesis and Treatment Research Unit, Doris Duke Medical Research Institute, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban
$^{3}$ Department of Pulmonology and Critical Care, Groote Schuur Hospital, University of Cape Town, South Africa
$^{4}$ Department of Biochemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, National Institute for Research in Tuberculosis, Chennai, India
$^{5}$ Barcelona Institute for Global Health, University of Barcelona, Spain
$^{6}$ Infectious Diseases Institute, College of Health Sciences, Makerere University, Uganda
$^{7}$ Kibong'oto Infectious Diseases Hospital, Siha, Kilimanjaro, Tanzania
$^{8}$ Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, WHO Collaborating Centre for TB/HIV and TB Elimination, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy
$^{9}$ Department of Public Health, Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Prevention Institute, University of Zurich, Switzerland
$^{10}$ Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA

# SUMMARY

Low serum concentrations of first-line tuberculosis (TB) drugs have been widely reported. However, the impact of low serum concentrations on treatment outcome is less well studied. A systematic search of MEDLINE/Pubmed and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials up to 31 March 2018 was conducted for articles describing drug concentrations of first-line TB drugs and treatment outcome in adult patients with drug-susceptible TB. The search identified 3073 unique publication abstracts, which were reviewed for suitability: 21 articles were acceptable for inclusion in the qualitative analysis comprising 13 prospective observational cohorts, 4 retrospective observational cohorts, 1 case-control study and 3 randomised controlled

Correspondence to: Rubeshan Perumal, CAPRISA, Doris Duke Medical Research Institute, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Private Bag X7, Congella 4013, South Africa. rubeshanperumal@gmail.com

Conflicts of interest: none declared.

trials. Data for meta-analysis were available for 15 studies, 13 studies of rifampicin (RMP), 10 of isoniazid (INH), 8 of pyrazinamide (PZA) and 4 of ethambutol (EMB). This meta-analysis revealed that low PZA concentration appears to increase the risk of poor outcomes (8 studies, n = 2727; RR 1.73, 95%CI 1.10--2.72), low RMP concentrations may slightly increase the risk of poor outcomes (13 studies, n = 2753; RR 1.40, 95%CI 0.91--2.16), whereas low concentrations of INH (10 studies, n = 2640; RR 1.32, 95%CI 0.66--2.63) and EMB (4 studies, n = 551; RR 1.12, 95%CI 0.41--3.05) appear to make no difference to treatment outcome. There was no significant publication bias or between-study heterogeneity in any of the analyses. The potential clinical impact of low concentrations of PZA and RMP warrants further evaluation. Also, comprehensive assessments of the complex pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationships in the treatment of TB are urgently needed.

## RÉSUMÉ

Des concentrations sériques faibles de médicaments antituberculeux de première ligne ont été largement rapportées, mais leur impact sur le résultats du traitement est moins étudié. Une recherche systématique sur Medline/PubMed et le registre central des essais contrôlés de Cochrane a été réalisée, depuis le démarrage jusqu'au 31 mars 2018, pour des articles décrivant les concentrations de médicaments pour la tuberculose (TB) de première ligne et les résultats du traitement de patients adultes atteints de TB pharmacosensible. La recherche a identifié 3073 abstracts de publications dont le caractère approprié a été vérifié ; 21 articles ont été acceptés pour leur inclusion dans l'analyse qualitative et ont consisté en 13 cohortes d'observation prospective, 4 cohortes d'observation rétrospective, 1 étude cas témoins et 3 essais randomisés contrôlés. Les données de 15 études ont été disponibles pour un méta analyse ; 13 études de la rifampicine (RMP), 10 études de l'isoniazide (INH), 8 études du pyrazinamide (PZA) et 4 études dé l'éthambutol (EMB). Cette méta analyse a découvert qu'une concentration faible du PZA augmentait probablement le risque de résultat médiocre (8 études, n = 2727 ; RR 1,73 ; IC95% 1,10--2,72), qu'une faible concentration de RMP pouvait légèrement augmenter le risque de mauvais résultats (13 études, n = 2753 ; RR 1,40 ; IC95% 0,91--2,16), tandis que des concentrations faibles d'INH (10 études, n = 2640 ; RR 1,32 ; IC95% 0,66--2,63) et d'EMB (4 études, n = 551 ; RR 1,12 ; IC95% 0,41--3,05) n'induisaient pas de différence évidente en matière de résultat du traitement. Il n'y a pas eu de biais de publication significatifs ni d'hétérogénéité entre études dans aucune des analyses. L'impact clinique potentiel des concentrations du PZA et de la RMP justifie d'autres évaluations. Il est urgent de réaliser des évaluations poussées des relations complexes entre pharmacocinétique et pharmacodynamique dans le traitement de la TB.

## RESUMEN

La concentración sérica baja de fármacos antituberculosos de primera línea ha sido objeto de múltiples comunicaciones, sin embargo, su efecto sobre los desenlaces terapéuticos se ha estudiado menos. Se llevó a cabo una búsqueda sistemática en la base de datos MEDLINE/PubMed y el Registro Central de Cochrane de Ensayos Clínicos Controlados desde su comienzo hasta el 31 de marzo del 2018 de artículos que describían la concentración de los fármacos antituberculosos de primera línea y el desenlace terapéutico en pacientes adultos con tuberculosis (TB) normosensible. Se encontraron 3073 resúmenes de publicaciones únicas, de las cuales se evaluaron los criterios de selección; 21 artículos fueron aptos para inclusión en el análisis cualitativo; se incluyeron 13 estudios de cohortes observacionales prospectivos, 4 estudios de

cohortes observacionales retrospectivos, 1 estudio de casos y testigos y 3 ensayos clínicos aleatorizados. Quince estudios contaban con datos para el metanálisis; 13 estudios examinaban la rifampicina (RMP), 10 la isoniazida (INH), 8 la pirazinamida (PZA) y 4 el etambutol (EMB). En el metanálisis se encontró que la concentración baja de PZA probablemente aumenta el riesgo de alcanzar un desenlace desfavorable (ocho estudios; n = 2727; RR 1,73; IC95% 1,10--2,72), una concentración baja de RMP puede causar un leve aumento del riesgo de desenlace desfavorable (13 estudios, n = 2753; RR 1,40; IC95% 0,91--2,16), pero no se observó una clara diferencia en el desenlace terapéutico con concentraciones bajas de INH (10 estudios, n = 2640; RR 1,32; IC95% 0,66--2,63) ni EMB (4 estudios, n = 551; RR 1,12; IC95% 0,41--3,05). No se observó un sesgo de publicación importante ni heterogeneidad entre los estudios en ninguno de los análisis. La posible significación clínica de las concentraciones bajas de PZA y RMP justifica realizar nuevas investigaciones. Asimismo, se precisan con urgencia evaluaciones exhaustivas de las complejas relaciones farmacocinéticas y farmacodinámicas en el tratamiento de la TB.

## Keywords

TB, drug concentration, pharmacokinetics, treatment outcomes

DESPITE CONSIDERABLE EFFORTS to control the epidemic over the past century, tuberculosis (TB) remains the leading cause of death worldwide from a curable infectious disease.^{1} Since 2016, the global response to TB has intensified, with the ambitious goals of reducing the number of deaths due to TB by 95% and the number of new cases by 90% by 2035.^{2} The early success of the present first-line TB regimen, consisting of rifampicin (RMP), isoniazid (INH), pyrazinamide (PZA) and ethambutol (EMB) in combination, has ensured their use in almost all regimens for drug-susceptible TB (DS-TB) used over the past three decades.^{3} The strength of the present WHO-recommended regimen is due to its reported efficacy of over 95% in DS-TB cases, its ability to achieve early bactericidal activity (EBA) and sterilisation of dividing bacilli, and its action against non-replicating persistent mycobacteria.^{4--6} Despite the high global cure rate, much lower rates of treatment success have been reported in some parts of the world; only nine of the top 30 high TB burden countries reached or exceeded a 90% cure rate for DS-TB, and over 1 million people experienced poor outcomes globally in 2016.^{1}

The highly variable pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) profile of first-line TB drugs has received much attention since the advent of modern molecular advancements in PK/PD science and the application of therapeutic drug monitoring principles to TB.^{4,7--15} However, the optimal serum concentrations for these drugs have not been irrefutably established, which has raised questions about whether our current dosing strategies are adequate.^{16--19} The emergence of acquired drug resistance, even in the context of well-functioning TB control programmes and high levels of adherence, has placed increased pressure on the scientific community to improve our understanding of the pharmacological issues in the treatment of TB.^{20} While our understanding of the factors that affect the pharmacokinetics of first-line TB drugs has improved in the past decade, the impact of low serum concentrations (based on the most widely used reference ranges for peak serum concentrations) on treatment outcome remains unclear.^{4,10,21--28} Estimates of peak serum

concentrations for first-line TB drugs are most frequently based on serum concentrations measured 2 h after dose administration, a method which has largely been supported by population pharmacokinetic studies.^{4,7--9,29--31} The role of other PK/PD parameters including: peak serum concentrations relative to the minimal inhibitory concentration (C_{max}: MIC); time above the MIC; and area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) show promise for setting future therapeutic targets.^{32--34} Previous evaluations of the clinical impact of TB drug pharmacokinetics have focused on intermediate treatment outcome biomarkers such as sputum smear and culture conversion, usually at 2 months after treatment initiation. However, both sputum smear and culture at Month 2 have been demonstrated to have low sensitivity and modest specificity for predicting treatment failure or relapse.^{35} If it is true that low drug serum concentrations contribute to therapeutic failure, therapeutic drug monitoring with dose adjustment, or perhaps even an overhaul of our current dosing strategy might offer a practical way to improve treatment outcomes and reduce the costs associated with extended treatment.^{18,19,36--38}

The present systematic review summarises the available evidence on the association between first-line TB drug concentrations in adult patients with DS-TB and treatment outcome. Meta-analysis was conducted to compare WHO-defined treatment outcomes between patients with therapeutic and low first-line drug serum concentrations.

## METHODS

### Search strategy and selection criteria

Studies were identified in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines.^{39} Systematic searches of Medline/PubMed and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials were conducted, from inception to 31 March 2018, for publications in which pharmacokinetic data of first-line TB drugs and treatment outcomes were reported. The search strategy included the following Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) terms in titles and abstracts: (‘tuberculosis' OR ‘rifampicin' OR ‘rifampin' OR ‘isoniazid' OR ‘pyrazinamide' OR ‘ethambutol' OR ‘antimycobacterial' OR ‘antituberculosis' OR ‘antitubercular agents') AND (‘drug monitoring' OR ‘concentration' OR ‘pharmacokinetic' OR ‘outcome'). Publications were limited to human studies in the English language. A manual search of all pertinent articles from the reference list of identified articles was conducted to identify additional articles not found by the electronic search.

We included all studies that described at least one first-line drug concentration, measured on at least one time-point during the intensive phase of treatment in adult patients with DS-TB, and which also reported TB treatment outcome. Case reports were excluded as these studies were not able to investigate the association between drug concentrations and treatment outcome. Studies which described drug concentrations exclusively in patients with poor outcomes were excluded, as this precluded the determination of an association between drug concentrations and outcome. Studies including children without separation of results for adults were excluded as the specific pharmacokinetics of first-line TB drugs in children was beyond the scope of this review. In addition, we excluded reviews, population pharmacokinetic modelling studies and studies in pregnant women.

###

Data extraction and quality assessment

Two authors (RP and NP) independently screened all identified articles for inclusion, and any disagreement was settled through discussion and consensus. The following data elements were extracted onto a standardised data extraction form: author, year of publication, study setting, study design, sample size, unique patient characteristics (including special populations), drug formulation, drug dosing, dose interval, drug concentrations (2-h post-dose drug concentration [C_{2hr}] or peak serum concentration [C_{max}]), additional pharmacokinetic parameters if available (AUC) and treatment outcomes. The authors of the relevant studies were contacted and asked to provide further information if the summary statistics provided in the published manuscript were not adequate for our analysis. For each study, we determined the proportion of patients with a low drug serum concentration (referred to as ‘low drug concentration'), as determined by published therapeutic cut-offs (Table 1), for each outcome.^{30,40} Methodological quality of included studies was assessed using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) for assessing the quality of non-randomised studies in systematic reviews and meta-analyses.^{41} Risk of bias judgments (Table 2) were based on a NOS threshold score of 7 or more, which indicated a low risk of bias. Overall quality judgments were made using the Agency for Health and Research Quality (AHRQ) standards after applying NOS domain-specific conversion thresholds.^{42} Publication bias was assessed for by visual inspection of the funnel plot symmetry for each exposure.

### Statistical analysis

Data were extracted from eligible studies and arranged in contingency tables. Exposure was defined as a low drug concentration based on published laboratory reference values (Table 1). Final treatment outcome was dichotomised as good or poor based on the reported WHO treatment outcome categories in each study.^{43,44} A good outcome was defined by either cure or treatment completion, and a poor outcome was defined by death, treatment failure or relapse.^{44} We excluded data for patients who were lost to follow-up or for whom treatment outcome was not known. A random-effects model was used to estimate effect size and produce summary relative risk (RR) ratios. Between-study heterogeneity was assessed using Cochran's Q statistic, with P < 0.10 indicating heterogeneity and quantified using the I^{2} statistic, which represents the total variability across studies due to heterogeneity. I^{2} values of 25%, 50% and 75% corresponded to low, moderate and high degrees of heterogeneity, respectively. All statistical tests were two-sided, and the 5% level of significance was used. All data were analysed using Review Manager v5.3 (Cochrane Collaboration, Oxford, UK).

## RESULTS

### Study selection and study characteristics

The systematic search identified 3273 publication abstracts, which were retrieved for assessment (Figure 1). A total of 200 articles were duplicates, with 198 of the 3073 remaining articles found to be suitable for full-text screening. A further 177 articles were excluded on the basis that they were review articles, paediatric studies, case studies, studies completed in healthy volunteers, studies of pregnant women, animal studies, population modelling studies, exclusively drug-resistant TB studies,

because they did not report treatment outcomes. The remaining 21 articles were found to be acceptable for inclusion in this review (Figure 1). The setting was a high TB-HIV burden country in 11 studies.^{28,45--54} Six studies were conducted in high-income countries,^{55--60} eight in middle-income countries,^{28,47--50,61--63} and seven in low-income countries.^{22,45,46,51--54} The 21 studies comprised 13 prospective observational cohorts,^{22,45,47--50,52--54,60--63} 4 retrospective observational cohorts,^{55,57--59} 1 case-control study^{56} and 3 randomised controlled trials.^{28,46,51} Trial designs were determined by the primary objective of the paper; however, all studies contributed observational cohort data for evaluating the relationship between first-line drug concentrations and treatment outcome. Eight studies listed an evaluation of the impact of first-line drug pharmacokinetics on treatment outcome as the primary objective of the study.^{47--49,52,53,58--60} Twenty studies evaluated RMP pharmacokinetics,^{22,28,45--62} 16 evaluated INH,^{47--61,63} 13 evaluated PZA^{46--50,52--54,56,58--61} and 9 evaluated EMB.^{46,50,52--54,58--61} All studies used the drugs at doses within the WHO-recommended dose range. In six studies, drugs were administered as a fixed-dose formulation,^{22,28,48,51--53} 11 studies administered single-drug products,^{45,46,49,50,54,56,59,61--64} while the remaining four studies used both formulations.^{47,57,58,60} Fasting conditions at the time of drug administration were ensured in nine studies.^{22,45,46,48,50,51,53,59,61} A full concentration-time curve was constructed in seven studies,^{22,46--48,51,53,55} while a limited sampling strategy was used in 14 studies.^{28,45,49,50,52,54,56--63} Drug concentrations were quantified using high-performance liquid chromatography with or without mass spectrometry in all studies except one, in which the method of bioanalysis was not fully described.^{56} Pharmacokinetic data were presented as drug concentrations in all studies, while the area under plasma drug concentration-time curve was derived, in addition, in six studies.^{22,46,47,51,53,63} All studies reported the proportion of patients with low drug concentrations, and seven studies evaluated the association between drug pharmacokinetics and treatment outcome.^{47,49,50,53,59,60,62} Individual study characteristics are given in Table 3. Data required for meta-analysis were not available for two studies,^{45,55} and only partial data were available for three studies.^{46,50,60} Four studies were both-armed zero-total event studies, in which all patients had good outcomes.^{54,56,57,61}

### Risk of bias and assessment of methodological quality

The majority (20/21) of the studies were assessed as having low risk of bias, and high overall methodological quality (Table 2). One study was scored as having a high risk of bias and poor methodological quality for determining the impact of low drug concentrations on treatment outcome, predominantly on the basis that comparability between the exposed (low drug concentrations) and unexposed (therapeutic drug concentrations) patients was limited.^{58} Five studies only included patients who had therapeutic drug monitoring performed for clinical indications, and who were therefore not representative of all patients with pulmonary TB.^{47,56--58,60} Six studies reported loss to follow-up rates of more than 10%.^{48,49,53,60,62,63} A visual inspection of funnel plots for all exposures revealed symmetrical distributions around the effect measure with no evidence of significant publication bias.

###

Meta-analysis of treatment outcomes and rifampicin concentrations

The clinical impact of RMP drug concentration was assessed in 20 studies;^{22,28,45--62} four studies were zero-total event studies in which no poor outcomes were observed,^{54,56,57,61} and data for meta-analysis were not available from a further three studies.^{45,50,55} Meta-analysis of the remaining 13 studies comprised 2109 patients with low RMP concentration and 644 patients with therapeutic RMP concentration, and a total of 150 poor outcomes (Figure 2). Low RMP concentration may slightly increase or make no difference to the risk of poor outcome (RR 1.40, 95%CI 0.91--2.16), with no significant heterogeneity between studies (P = 0.13, I^{2} = 0%). After excluding the study with a high risk of bias,^{58} pooled evaluation of the remaining studies indicated higher risk of impact on outcome, but this did not reach statistical significance (RR 1.49, 95%CI 0.96--2.30).

### Meta-analysis of treatment outcomes and isoniazid concentrations

The clinical impact of INH concentration was assessed in 16 studies;^{47--54,56--61,63,64} four studies were zero-total event studies in which no poor outcomes were observed,^{54,56,57,61} and data for meta-analysis were not available from a further two studies.^{50,55} Meta-analysis of the remaining 10 studies comprised 848 patients with low INH concentration and 1792 patients with therapeutic INH concentration, and a total of 144 poor outcomes (Figure 3). Low INH concentration makes no clear difference to the risk of poor outcome (RR 1.32, 95%CI 0.66--2.63), with no significant heterogeneity between studies (P = 0.44, I^{2} = 44%). By excluding the one study with a high risk of bias,^{58} pooled evaluation of the remaining studies suggests that low INH concentration may slightly increase or make no difference to the risk of poor outcomes (RR 1.59, 95%CI 0.91--2.80).

### Meta-analysis of treatment outcomes and pyrazinamide concentrations

The clinical impact of PZA drug concentrations was assessed in 13 studies;^{46--50,52--54,56,58--61} three studies were zero-total event studies in which no poor outcomes were observed,^{54,56,61} and data for meta-analysis was not available from a further two studies.^{46,60} Meta-analysis of the remaining eight studies comprised 389 patients with low PZA concentration and 2338 patients with therapeutic PZA concentration, and a total of 142 poor outcomes (Figure 4). Low pyrazinamide concentration increased the risk of poor outcome (RR 1.73, 95%CI 1.10--2.72), with low heterogeneity between studies (P = 0.02, I^{2} = 10%). After excluding the study with a high risk of bias,^{58} pooled evaluation of the remaining studies did not significantly change this finding (RR 1.79, 95%CI 1.08--2.96).

### Meta-analysis of treatment outcome and ethambutol concentrations

The clinical impact of EMB drug concentration was assessed in nine studies;^{46,50,52--54,58--61} two studies were zero-total event studies in which no poor outcomes were observed,^{54,61} and data for meta-analysis were not available from a further three studies.^{46,50,60} Meta-analysis of the remaining four studies comprised 121 patients with low EMB concentration and 430 patients with therapeutic EMB concentration, and a total of 45 poor outcomes (Figure 5). Low EMB concentration makes no clear difference to the risk of poor outcomes (RR 1.12, 95%CI 0.41--3.05), with no significant heterogeneity between studies (P = 0.82, I^{2} = 22%).

###

After excluding the study with a high risk of bias,^{58} pooled evaluation of the remaining studies did not significantly change this finding (RR 1.08, 95%CI 0.29--3.94).

## DISCUSSION

Despite the renewed interest in the pharmacokinetics of first-line TB drugs, there has been a lack of studies evaluating the clinical implications of low drug concentrations. Recent modelling data that evaluated various novel RMP-susceptible TB regimens suggest that first-line drug regimen efficacy was the characteristic with the greatest potential to reduce TB incidence and mortality, which means that maintaining efficacy of existing regimens should be as important as research into novel regimens.^{65} Optimising first-line drug pharmacokinetics through therapeutic drug monitoring or overhaul of the present dosing strategy are potential means to this end.

The prevalence of low drug concentrations was high for all drugs but varied considerably between studies, consistent with a previous meta-analysis of serum drug concentrations of first-line TB drugs.^{66} The low proportion of poor outcomes overall (death, treatment failure or relapse), especially studies in which no poor outcomes occurred, limited our ability to evaluate the relationship between drug concentrations and treatment outcome. One possible reason for good outcomes despite the high proportion of patients with low drug concentrations overall is that the present reference ranges are set too high. In addition, critical to the evaluation of the impact of pharmacokinetics on treatment outcomes is the individual measurement or local population estimate of Mycobacterium tuberculosis MIC values. A recent re-analysis of MIC values from two clinical trials found that elevated MICs, although still below the breakpoint for resistance, were associated with a higher rate of relapse.^{34} As both in vitro and clinical studies have shown that the susceptibility breakpoint MICs should likely be lower than currently set, some investigators have stressed the importance of intermediate susceptibility and dose-dependent MIC values.^{67--69} Variable pharmacogenomics among endemic TB populations and variable pathogen characteristics such as MICs may intervene in the relationship between first-line drug pharmacokinetics and treatment outcome.

Only 10 studies included sufficient follow-up of patients after the completion of TB treatment to assess for relapse;^{47,51,53,57--63} six studies identified no cases of relapse after at least six months of post-treatment follow-up,^{53,57,58,61--63} while the remaining four studies reported disease relapse in 2.6--13.4% of their respective cohorts.^{47,51,59,60} These studies highlight the need for the inclusion of relapse data in the standardised global reporting of treatment outcomes for TB, especially since these studies reported predominantly HIV-negative cohorts in which recurrent TB disease is likely to have been due to disease relapse rather than exogenous reinfection. While the relationship between low drug concentrations and the risk of relapse has not been rigorously studied in prospective clinical studies, it has been postulated that low drug concentrations may fail to sterilise a population of slow-growing or non-replicating mycobacteria, which can survive low drug exposure but may be resuscitated when conditions become conducive, resulting in relapse of the disease.^{70}

Of the 21 included studies, 17 studies included at least one patient who experienced a poor outcome and were, therefore, able to evaluate the relationship between drug concentrations and treatment outcome. Seven studies reported their findings on this relationship, three of which identified no association between a low concentration of first-line TB drugs and treatment outcome.^{47,59,62} Four studies did, however, report an association between drug concentration and treatment outcome:^{49,50,53,60} first, a prospective observational cohort study of 1912 outpatients in a middle-income, high TB-HIV burden country demonstrated that patients with a low RMP concentration were less likely to experience a favourable treatment outcome (adjusted odds ratio 0.94, 95%CI 0.89--0.99);^{49} second, a prospective observational cohort study of 32 inpatients and outpatients in a high-income country with a low TB and HIV burden demonstrated a significantly lower mean INH concentration in patients with poor treatment outcome compared with those with good outcomes (mean INH C_{max} 1.0 vs. 2.6 mg/l, P = 0.004);^{60} third, two prospective observational studies demonstrated an increased risk of poor treatment outcomes in patients with low concentrations of both RMP and INH; the effect was not demonstrated for each drug alone;^{53,60} and finally a prospective observational cohort study of 225 outpatients in a high TB-HIV burden setting reported an increased risk (adjusted RR 3.3, 95%CI 1.84--6.22) for a poor outcome in patients with low PZA concentration.^{50} While a prospective observational cohort study of 142 hospitalised patients in a high TB burden setting did not find an association between dichotomised TB drug concentrations using the present reference ranges and treatment outcomes, the authors presented a novel statistical approach, a classification and regression tree analysis, to evaluate the impact of the full first-line drug pharmacokinetic curve on treatment outcome.^{47} Using this method, the authors identified new AUC thresholds for RMP, INH and PZA that were predictive of a poor treatment outcome. The drug thresholds predictive of this outcome were a 24-h AUC of 363 mgh/l for PZA, 13 mgh/l for RMP and 52 mgh/l for INH. Using these thresholds, having a low AUC of any first-line drug was associated with a significantly increased risk (OR 14.1, 95%CI 4.08--49.08) of a poor outcome.^{47} In addition, patients with PZA or RMP AUCs below the threshold values had a significantly increased risk of relapse (OR 51.9, 95%CI 3.04--886).

Our meta-analysis found that low PZA concentration probably increases the risk of poor outcome, low RMP concentration may slightly increase the risk of poor outcome, while low concentrations of INH and EMB had no clear impact on treatment outcome. Limiting the analysis to studies with a low risk of bias had no impact on the overall findings for any of the first-line drugs. The dominant role of PZA for both EBA and sterilising effect is a potential explanation for the findings of this study, which emphasises the potential role of the drug in future multidrug regimens aimed at shortening treatment duration. Similarly, higher than standard dose RMP is safe, well-tolerated and associated with shorter time to culture conversion, and is therefore a readily available intervention. INH may exert its maximal activity early in the course of treatment when a higher bacillary burden of replicating M. tuberculosis is present, and it is likely that end-of-treatment outcomes are not the outcome measure most reflective of its importance in the regimen. In addition, INH activity more than RMP, PZA and EMB is best defined by AUC/MIC rather than the C_{max}/MIC.^{71} As INH levels may also peak earlier than 2 h, the most frequently used sampling time-point, patients included in this analysis may have been misclassified as having low INH

concentrations when they might have had adequate peak concentrations at an earlier time point. Despite the absence of a strong association between therapeutic drug concentrations based on the present reference range and end-of-treatment outcome, dose adjustment with early therapeutic drug monitoring may be able to achieve other important goals such as reduced time to microbiological clearance, prevention of acquired drug resistance and freedom from relapse.^{47,72--74}

To our knowledge, this is one of only a few reviews focused on establishing the relationship between low drug concentrations and end-of-treatment outcome in TB, and the only meta-analysis on the subject.^{66,75--77} Nonetheless, several limitations should be noted. While the proportion of low drug concentrations was consistently reported, it was beyond the scope of this review to evaluate the factors leading to low drug concentrations. Similarly, we did not collect data on the quality of drugs used in the included studies, nor did we confirm the bioequivalence or bioavailability of drugs used. We evaluated the relationship between individual drug concentrations and treatment outcome, but were not able to evaluate the effect of the various combinations of drug concentrations, as we did not have access to patient-level data. This is especially important as previous studies have reported the association between poor outcome and combinations of low drug concentrations, especially the combination of low RMP and INH concentrations.^{53,60}

Similarly, the impact of the cumulative number of drugs below therapeutic cut-offs may be more important than individual drug concentrations.^{47,72,78} This review evaluated only the four most commonly used first-line drugs in the treatment of DS-TB. The study of other rifamycins may contribute additional knowledge to this issue, especially given the accumulating evidence of rifapentine exposure-dependent sputum sterilisation.^{79,80} In addition, novel first-line agents such as moxifloxacin show promise for dose optimisation and may be a useful subject for future reviews.^{81,82} Also, we evaluated only standard doses of first-line drugs, and it possible that we were unable to detect a dose-response, using dichotomised drug exposure, with the present limited dose range. High-dose RMP, up to 35 mg/kg, has been shown to be safe and well-tolerated, and is associated with improved sputum sterilisation.^{19} Neither MIC nor any other measure of PK/PD matching was evaluated in this review, but these remain important areas for future research in optimising TB treatment. The reporting of disease relapse was inconsistent in the studies included in this review, and given the increasing burden of recurrent TB globally, it remains possible that treatment success is overestimated when disease relapse is not included as a poor treatment outcome.^{34}

Moreover, there was little consensus on the reporting standard, nomenclature or definitions for TB treatment outcomes; this increases the risk of heterogeneity due to misclassification. In particular, the classification of treatment extension, the required duration of follow-up for the assessment of disease relapse, and the need to distinguish relapse from reinfection are not appropriately addressed in the WHO definitions for reporting treatment outcomes.^{44,83} An individual patient data meta-analysis may better evaluate the impact of first-line drug concentrations on treatment outcome, given the complexity of TB treatment, and the numerous biological, behavioural, pharmacological, pathogen and structural factors which may confound the relationship.

Perumal et al.

# CONCLUSION

This meta-analysis found that low PZA concentration probably increases the risk of poor outcomes; low RMP concentration may slightly increase the risk of poor outcome; whereas low concentrations of INH and EMB make no clear difference to treatment outcomes, when assessed using the dichotomous range of low or therapeutic concentrations of these drugs. Further evaluation of the current reference values of first-line TB drugs is needed if therapeutic drug monitoring is to be pursued, as has been urgently called for.[84,85] Also, more comprehensive assessments of the complex PK/PD relationships using novel indices of these drugs may shed more light on the subject and are currently underway (NCT03559582). The consequence of low drug concentrations on the risk for disease relapse and acquired drug resistance is an important area for future research. Finally, this meta-analysis demonstrates the need for randomised controlled trials evaluating therapeutic drug monitoring and dose adjustment, in varying forms of TB host disease states and patient settings, for first-line TB drugs.

# Acknowledgements

We thank the authors of the included studies for responding to our requests for clarification of their published data.